===PAGE 1===
Professor Dr Aram Baram, The Pleura | 2025-2026
Pleural Diseases
Anatomy and Physiology of the pleura:
The pleura is a serous membrane covering the lungs, mediastinum, diaphragm, and inner
chest wall. It consists of the visceral pleura, which envelops the lung surface and
interlobar fissures, and the parietal pleura, which lines the thoracic cavity and is
subdivided into costal, mediastinal, and diaphragmatic components. Both layers contain
mesothelial cells that secrete lubricating fluid to allow smooth respiratory movement. The
visceral and parietal pleura meet at the lung root, where the mediastinal pleura reflects
laterally over the hilum and forms the pulmonary ligament posteriorly.
The narrow pleural space between the two layers contains a small amount of fluid and is
completely separated between right and left by the mediastinum. Blood supply is
primarily from the intercostal arteries, with venous drainage to the chest wall veins. The
parietal pleura is richly innervated by intercostal nerves, producing somatic pain with
trauma or tumor invasion, whereas the visceral, mediastinal, and diaphragmatic pleura are
supplied mainly by the phrenic nerve.
Normal pleural fluid volume is approximately 0.25 mL/kg, with a turnover of 0.15
mL/kg/hour. Fluid dynamics are governed by Starling forces, capillary permeability,
lymphatic drainage, and negative intrathoracic pressure. Fluid is filtered mainly from
parietal pleural capillaries and reabsorbed by parietal lymphatics. Disruption of these
mechanisms leads to pleural effusion. The pleural fluid’s main functions are to reduce
friction, maintain lung–chest wall apposition, and ensure effective mechanical coupling
during breathing.
Common pleural disorders
1. Pneumothorax
2. Hydrothorax including empyema thoracis
3. Hydropneumothorax
4. Hemothorax is discussed in thoracic trauma lecture
5. Tumors
Pneumothorax
Overview
• Abnormal presence of air within the pleural cavity
• Results in dissociation of the parietal and visceral pleura leading to a disruption of lung
mechanics.
• Lung compression reduces lung compliance, volumes, and diffusion capacity and
causes ventilation-perfusion mismatch and poor gas exchange
1
===PAGE 2===
Professor Dr Aram Baram, The Pleura | 2025-2026
Types of pneumothoraxes
1. Spontaneous: Primary spontaneous pneumothorax
2. Secondary spontaneous pneumothorax; due to underlying lung disease such as:
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, Bronchiolitis, Pneumocystis infection, Cystic
fibrosis, Asthma, Necrotizing pneumonia, Tuberculosis infection, Congenital cysts,
Pulmonary fibrosis, Catamenial
3. Trauma Blunt thoracic injury, Penetrating injury
4. Iatrogenic as in Barotrauma of mechanical ventilation, Percutaneous transthoracic
lung biopsy, Central venous catheterization
5. Thoracotomy/thoracostomy
6. Others, such as in Bronchopleural fistula, Esophageal perforation
Tension Pneumothorax
• If pneumothorax is left untreated, air can accumulate without decompressing
adequately, leading to high positive pleural pressures, causing severe lung collapse,
compression of the mediastinum with deviation to the contralateral side causing great
vessels and heart compression, and ultimately hemodynamic compromise.
• Patients in tension pneumothorax require immediate clinical diagnosis, followed by
needle decompression in the second intercostal space at the midclavicular line, followed
by tube thoracostomy.
Etiology of Pneumothorax
Primary Spontaneous Pneumothorax (PSP): no underlying trauma or iatrogenic cause
for p pneumothorax could be identified, Incidence is 7.4/100,000 (male ) and
1.2/100,000 (females annually. PSP is caused by the rupture of small blebs (bullae)
usually in apices of the upper or lower lobes, allowing air to leak into the pleural cavity.
About 80 % of patients will demonstrate emphysema-like changes on CT scan. PSP
occurs most commonly in thin tall young male patients. Smoking and atmospheric
pressure changes are also risk factors.
Secondary Spontaneous Pneumothorax: known underlying lung disease. Incidence is
6.3/100,000 (men) and 2.0/100,000 (women) annually. Underlying disease causing lung
parenchymal rupture and pneumothorax.
Clinical Presentation
Sudden onset ipsilateral pleuritic chest pain and dyspnea (most common), associated with
tachypnoea, and tachycardia.
2
===PAGE 3===
Professor Dr Aram Baram, The Pleura | 2025-2026
Physical examination: may be normal if the pneumothorax is small i.e. <25 % of the
lung is collapsed. Decreased breath sounds, and hyperresonance on the affected side (not
always present), Subcutaneous emphysema may present in traumatic pneumothorax
Tension pneumothorax: cases would present with signs of respiratory distress ( severe
dyspnea, peripheral and/or central cyanosis, tachypnea, distended neck veins,
tachycardia, hypotension also presents with tracheal deviation to the contralateral side
Rarely: pneumomediastinum or pneumopericardium(Hamman’s sign).
Diagnosis:
This is established by an upright chest X-ray. If clinical signs of tension pneumothorax is
present chest X-ray confirmation should be omitted and immediate decompression should
ensue. Pneumothorax in supine patients accumulates into the dependent regions of the anterior
and subdiaphragmatic pleura and may be detected as a deep sulcus sign.
Although CT scan is the gold-standard for diagnosis, it is not necessary for the majority of
patients with first episode spontaneous pneumothorax since it does not change the management.
Ultrasound is also an accurate, rapid and non-invasive test, yet requires operator experience.
Management
• The etiology largely dictates both immediate and definitive management.
Conservative Observation mainly in PSP: Reserved for asymptomatic patients with a
small pneumothorax who are unlikely to have an ongoing air leak. Follow-up
radiography should be obtained within 24–48 hours to document improvement.
Supplemental oxygen can help decrease the alveolar pressure of nitrogen in the body,
thus creating a gradient to reabsorb the air from the pleura (mostly composed of nitrogen)
into the alveoli and tissues. Conservative management re-expands the lung at an average
rate of 2.2 % / day with a 79 % success rate. Failure for the pneumothorax to resolve in
48 hours needs intervention.
• Aspiration: A small cannula can be used to aspirate pleural air, with a success rate of 75
and 40 % for a primary and secondary spontaneous pneumothorax, respectively. This
technique is rarely used. Can be attached to a Heimlich one-way valve or a three-way
stop-cock with a large syringe.
• Percutaneous Catheters: Small-caliber tube thoracostomy can be performed
percutaneously via the Seldinger technique and attached to either a Heimlich one-way
valve or suction. Use is limited to a spontaneous pneumothorax with limited respiratory
symptoms.
3
===PAGE 4===
Professor Dr Aram Baram, The Pleura | 2025-2026
• Tube Thoracostomy: Large-bore chest tubes are the standard of care for the treatment of
traumatic pneumothoraces, unstable patients, persistent or large air leaks and associated
effusions or haemothorax.
Recurrence after spontaneous pneumothorax is 30 % after the first episode, with the
majority occurring within 2 years . Independent risk factors for recurrence include:
pulmonary fibrosis, age >60 years, increased height/weight rati]. Recurrence rate
increases after each episode.
• Surgery: Guidelines recommend waiting at least 3–5 days for resolution of a
spontaneous pneumothorax before considering definitive surgical management. A
bullectomy can be performed preferably via a VATS approach with a success rate >95 %.
Other options including open thoracotomy and axillary approaches.
Indications for Operative Intervention:
1. Persistent air leak (> 5 days) or failure of lung to fully re-expand with chest tube
drainage
2. Hemopneumothorax
3. Recurrent ipsilateral pneumothorax
4. Bilateral spontaneous pneumothorax
5. First occurrence of contralateral pneumothorax
6. At-risk activities/professions (i.e., pilots, divers)
7. Poor access to medical treatment or follow-up
•Pleurodesis: Although surgery as definitive management of recurrent secondary
pneumothoraces is preferred, pleurodesis with talc, bleomycin or doxycycline remains an
option.
Pleural Effusions
Is an abnormal collection of fluid in the pleural space Can be transudative (low protein)
or exudative (high protein). Benign pleural effusions are twice as common as malignant
pleural effusions.
Empyema Thoracis
DEFINITIONS Empyema, from the Greek, is defined simply as “pus in the pleural
cavity.” The precursor of empyema is bacterial pneumonia and subsequent
parapneumonic effusion.
4
===PAGE 5===
Professor Dr Aram Baram, The Pleura | 2025-2026
Causes:
1. Pulmonary infections: Complicated and unresolved pneumonia, Bronchiectasis,
Tuberculosis, Lung abscess, intra-pleural ruptured hydatid cyst
2. Aspiration of pleural effusion for any cause may end by empyema if infected
3. Trauma: Blunt and penetrating chest trauma, thoracic surgery, esophageal surgery ,
4. Extra pulmonary causes: Subphrenic abscess
Clinical features:
There are symptoms of pus at any site like swinging pyrexia with generalize malaise,
purulent productive cough, chest pain. Parapneumonic effusions occur in 20–60% of
patients hospitalized for bacterial pneumonia; 5–10% of these parapneumonic effusions
progress to empyema. The mortality rate of empyema is significant: 25–75% in the
elderly and debilitated.
Parapneumonic effusions are exudative and progress through three stages to an
empyema:
1. First or exudative stage, characterized by relatively low LDH, normal glucose, and
normal pH of the pleural filud.
2. Second or fibropurulent stage evolves with invasion of pleural fluid by bacteria,
increased fibrin deposition, cellular debris, and white blood cells with the ultimate
formation of limiting fibrin membranes producing loculations
3. Third or organization stage occurs as fibroblasts grow into the exudative fibrin sheet
coating the visceral and parietal pleura with an inelastic membrane or pleural “peel”
encasing the lung and rendering it functionless and it’s the most difficult stage for
treatment.
Investigations:
1.Haematological Leukocytosis, elevated C. reactive protein and ESR
2.Standard posterior-anterior and lateral chest radiography shows pleural effusion,
hydropneumothorax, fibrothorax in late stages
3. Pleural fluid first must be determined as exudative or transudative, which is
accomplished by examination of pleural fluid obtained by thoracentesis criteria based on
levels of lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) and protein concentrations: an exudate as having
any one of the following characteristics:
A. pleural fluid protein divided by serum protein concentration greater than 0.5,
B. pleural fluid LDH concentration divided by serum LDH concentration greater than
0.6,
C. pleural fluid LDH concentration greater than two thirds of the upper limit of normal
serum LDH concentration, and
D. A pH less than 7.0.
5
===PAGE 6===
Professor Dr Aram Baram, The Pleura | 2025-2026
4. Ultrasonography is widely available in most institutions and frequently employed
after the initial chest X-ray. Ultrasound is rapid, portable, and less expensive than a chest
CT scan which is some time is necessary to identify the loculation.
5) Chest CT scan
Empyema is determined by analysis of the pleural fluid, and treatment is guided by
radiological assessment
MEDICAL MANAGEMENT
Medical management or conservative noninterventional therapy is rarely effective and
often contraindicated for management of empyema. Thoracentesis and culture
sensitivity–based antibiotic therapy are appropriate and generally successful for stage I
parapneumonic effusions but not stage II effusions or stage III empyema.
Drainage of the pleural space by radiologically guided catheters or surgical drainage must
be employed for successful management of empyema. Tube thoracostomy using a large-
bore chest tube (32–38 Fr) was the initial intervention when empyema was established.
After chest tube placement, fibrinolytics are administered until the pleural space is
cleared radiographically and the patient’s clinical condition is improved. Streptokinase
was initially used. Subsequently, urokinase was used and found to be more efficacious.
SURGICAL MANAGEMENT
About 20–30% require a surgical drainage procedure:
I) Thoracoscopy and debridement should be the next therapeutic maneuver after
attempted fibrinolysis. VATS must accomplish two therapeutic goals to be successful: (1)
establish a unified pleural space and (2) ensure total reexpansion of the lung parenchyma
with obliteration of the pleural cavity
II) Decortication via a thoracotomy should be performed when the third or fibrotic stage
of empyema is suggested by CT scan that reveals visceral pleural enhancement without
fibrin septation in multiple areas of loculation. Decortication refers to the process of
peeling this restrictive fibrous layer from the pleura, promoting lung reexpansion and
improving thoracic excursion
III) Open widow thoracostomy sometimes required
Malignant Pleural Effusions
Up to 22% of pleural effusions are caused by malignant disease. Affected patients with
advanced neoplastic diseases experience considerable morbidity as a result of these
pleural fluid collections.
ETIOLOGY
This may be due to primary or secondary tumors of the pleura with seeding of the
6
===PAGE 7===
Professor Dr Aram Baram, The Pleura | 2025-2026
intrapleural space and lymphatic obstruction. Of pleural neoplasms, 95% arise from a
metastatic source, with lung and breast carcinoma accounting for 75% of all cases. Other
common causes are lymphoma, gastric cancer, and ovarian cancer. Adenocarcinomas of
unknown primary constitute a distinct entity in patients in whom the source of the pleural
malignancy is never found. They are associated with exposure to environmental tobacco
smoke.
Clinical features and Physical Findings:
Patients with malignant pleural effusions are typically symptomatic and complain of
dyspnea, cough, or chest pain. The discomfort often is independent of respiration and but
is aggravated by activity. With invasive pleural metastases, the affected nerve roots may
radiate pain.
Physical findings indicating pleural effusion are decreased tactile fremitus and dullness to
percussion on examination of the posterior chest.
Imaging
1) Early evidence of pleural effusion by chest radiograph is costo-diaphragmatic sulcus
blunting caused by as little as 125 ml of fluid.
2) Computed tomography (CT) multiple pleural nodules and nodular pleural thickening
are generally limited to effusions of malignant etiology.
3)Thoracic ultrasound shows the optimal site for diagnostic thoracentesis of a small
pleural effusion. It also helps select ideal entry points for thoracoscopes or pleural biopsy
instruments by avoiding adhesions.
Diagnostic Procedures
The diagnosis of pleural effusion is confirmed by thoracentesis. Practically all malignant
pleural effusions are exudates. Criteria sets to classify effusions as exudative
Pleural Cytology and Biopsy
Cytological evaluations with standard staining (Papanicolaou’s smears) generally confirm
malignant pleural effusions. When standard pleural effusion cytology is nondiagnostic,
pleural needle biopsy is indicated
TREATMENT
The optimal treatment for malignant pleural effusion is controversial. The best goal to
achieve is drainage of the fluid and prevention of recurrence by Chemical pleurodesis by
talc powder or chemotherapy drugs like Bleomycien or By irritant agents like
Tetracycline .
7
===PAGE 8===
Professor Dr Aram Baram, The Pleura | 2025-2026
Chylothorax
Definition: Chylothorax is the presence of lymph fluid in the pleural space.
Chylothorax may be iatrogenic, traumatic, or spontaneous because of congenital or
acquired disorders. Early recognition is crucial to preventing serious complications of
chronic lymphatic loss. Initial drainage, combined with measures to reduce chyle flow
and maintain nutrition, may resolve the condition. For cases that do not show prompt
response, particularly in the postoperative or trauma setting, early surgical ligation of the
thoracic duct should be performed with the expectation of prompt resolution.
Thoracoscopy offers a minimally invasive approach and warrants consideration by
experienced surgeons. Other alternatives require consideration of the underlying etiology,
consideration of the patient’s medical condition and prognosis, and an understanding of
the limitations of these approaches.
Tumors of the Pleura: Malignant Pleural:
Primary tumors of the pleura are very rare. There are two main types:
1. Malignant Pleural Mesothelioma (MPM): most common primary tumor of the
pleura. Highly aggressive tumor with grave prognosis.
2. Localized Fibrous Tumor of the Pleura: significantly less aggressive than MPM,
also referred to as “localized mesothelioma.”
Epidemiology: Strong association with asbestos exposure (>80 % o cases), with 20-years
latency until the development of MM. 5:1 Male predominance, with peak incidence in the
sixth and seventh decade. Other causes: radiation, mineral fibers, simian virus 40.
Clinical Presentation
• Dyspnea
• Pain secondary to chest wall invasion and involvement of somatic nerves of the
parietal pleura
• Malignant pleural effusion
• Pleural thickening, subtle pleural masses on radiographic images, Thick, restrictive
pleural rind (late finding) with encasement of the lung
Work-Up
• CT chest with IV contrast +/− FDG-PET
8
===PAGE 9===
Professor Dr Aram Baram, The Pleura | 2025-2026
• MRI as an adjunct to determine depth of chest wall invasion
• or diaphragmatic involvement
• Thoracocentesis of malignant effusion: cytology and elevated pleural hyaluronic acid
have a 50 % diagnostic accuracy.
• Gold standard for diagnosis is thoracoscopic pleural biopsy of about 80 % Diagnostic
accuracy
Management
• Most patients present with locally advanced disease and not amenable to surgical
treatment options.
• Surgery: Extra pleural Pneumonectomy (EPP): en-bloc resection of the lung, visceral
pleura, parietal pleura, pericardium, hemidiaphragm. Surgery is reserved for patients with
localized and selected locally advanced disease. Surgery is provided in the context of
multi-modality therapy (neoadjuvant or adjuvant chemotherapy and adjuvant whole
thorax radiation therapy), with improvement in overall survival and disease-free survival
depending on tumor histopathology and regimen.
.
9